The Joe Rogan experience. Right now,
right now we are a week, not even a week out,
just a few days away from two mass shootings in a row.
And whenever these things happen,
there's all these people that want action,
but nobody knows exactly what to do. There's calls for gun control,
there's calls for mental health reform. There's calls for, I mean, what,
if anything can be done to stop these things from happening and how have
you sat down and tried to come up with some sort of a solution.
And is there a solution?
Look, I would be lying to you if I told you I had a magical answer.
Um, I don't, and this is such a horrific situation. I, you know,
we were in, um, you know, we, we had a town meeting, uh, we were in Nevada,
actually in Las Vegas when El Paso happened.
And, uh, we did tell me and I said, okay,
let's take a moment of silence to remember the victims and pray for the
survivors, literally the next day. And another part of Las Vegas,
I have to do it again. And I said,
I can't believe that just yesterday we did this and I have to do it again.
This is, I don't know what the words my friend Bader or rock would say, good.
You don't know what words, what, what can you say? This happens again and again,
who can imagine some lunatic walking into a school or a mall,
or just on a nightclub area and taken out of the assault weapon and shooting now
people.
And that we almost become to accept this as a normal part of American life
is, is incredible, is, is, is, is,
is just totally demoralizing art.
So here's what I think there's no magical answer. And,
but let me tell you what I think, first of all, this is the reality.
The reality is that today as we speak,
there are approximately 400 million guns in America.
Today we have more guns than we have people
we have between five to 10 million assault weapons and an assault
weapon, as you know,
is a military style weapon designed to kill human beings kind of rapidly.
So that's, and then on top of that, we have, again,
nothing to be proud of, but you know,
we have a number of mentally unstable people, people for whatever reason,
I walk in the streets as suicidal or homicidal. That's the mix that we have.
I think the answer is, and I'm not the guy to invent all these ideas,
but here's some of what we have to do. First of all,
if you want own a gun in America,
you have got to, we have got to know that you are a stable person,
and that means that we need to expand, uh,
eh, the background checks that currently exist. Okay. So we got to know,
did you beat up your wife, have you committed crimes, uh, et cetera, et cetera.
What is the state of your mental health? Uh, number two,
we want to make that universal number two right now
that there is a background check. If you walk into a gun show,
it did look into a gun shop,
but you can buy guns in various states at a gun show and you don't
have to do any of that. You and I go to a gun show, you sell me a gun.
I don't have to, you know, I don't have to do that. Third of all, I can today,
legally walk into a gun show, uh, pass the background,
check and buy a dozen guns,
walk out and sell them to criminal elements who will use them for bad things.
So I think those are issues, um,
that most Americans believe we have got to deal with.
And we can fourthly. I happen to believe,
and I believe this for 30 years that we should not be selling with distributing
assault weapons in this country. Uh,
they are weapons of mass destruction in a sense they kill people rapidly as we
saw. And, and thank God by the way, when we talk about both Dayton and El Paso,
thank God cops were there very,
very quickly and did an incredible job because of that guy had walked into the
nightclub that could have been dozens and dozens, more people killed.
And within a few minutes time, um,
I happen to believe a that we should not be selling or
distributing an assault weapons in this country. That's my view period. Uh,
so I believe in a ban on assault weapons.
And I think we have got to begin thinking about when we have five to 10 million
assault weapons, which is more than the us military has,
we have to think about a strong licensing procedure in terms of who
owns these assault weapons. So that's some of, uh, what I think, eh,
there are many other things, but those are some of the ideas that are out there.
Now, the legal gun owners who are law abiding citizens,
who would never in a million years think about going around shooting people,
but they love guns. They hear this kind of stuff about like banning assault,
rifles, banning assault, weapons. They don't even like the term assault weapons,
right?
They like to refer to them as their individual names for whatever they are.
These people feel like this is an inexorable part of being an
American,
that you should be able to own a gun it's written into our bill of rights is
written into our, the way we, the way this country was founded.
It's the second amendment. What do you say to those people that don't,
that don't want to give up their guns, where they wouldn't do,
and they want to protect themselves.
They feel like these guns are viable options to protect themselves from
criminals.
I understand that. And Joel, you may know him,
a Senator from the state of Vermont and the state of Vermont is one of the most
rural states in America, every fall,
that whole thousands and thousands of people are out in the woods hunting.
And it's something that's part of our tradition. I believe in it,
I believe in the second amendment,
but all that I ask of the owners and you're absolutely right.
99.9% of gun owners would never in a million billion years think of doing these
horrible things, but in the moment that we are living in,
uh, I think that we're all going to have to make, you know,
some concessions to the reality of what is going on.
And that is that there is a small number of call them what you want to pray for
people who are prepared to do that. You know, in Australia,
you remember that terrible, uh, New Zealand, I'm sorry,
the terrible shooting at the mosque. And they moved pretty quickly, uh,
in an aggressive way. So, you know, I wish I can say in, in,
in the best of all possible worlds, yeah. You know,
you could own any weapon you want and so forth and said,
we're not living in the best of all possible worlds.
We're living in a world where we're shocked every day. My horror.
So I, I agree. We are living in a terrible situation. I mean,
there's hundreds of mass shootings a year now, which is insane.
And if you look at the number in comparison to the rest of the world,
it's crazy like a big one in another country,
like three mass shootings in a year, we had more than 270. Correct.
It's it's crazy. But how would you implement something like this?
Well, the idea of banning assault weapons has been done in
1994, we've manned assault weapons. Uh, I believe,
I believe it was for 10 years, uh,
that ban was undone by Republican majority. Uh,
and it didn't, you know, I'm not suggesting by the way that anything here,
that if you banned assault weapons tomorrow,
that would radically change everything.
But we have got to do the best that we can do. And again,
I preface my remarks by telling I don't have a magical solution.
You've got hundreds of millions of guns out there.
You have people who should not be owning these guns who get set off by God,
knows what and, and do terrible things.
All we can do is the best that we could do. But to say we can't do anything,
I think is a real disservice to the miracle.
And I'll tell you something else that bothers me. You know,
in addition to the horror of seeing people lying on the street dead is
what this is doing to the children of this country.
And I think we underestimate that. I have seven grandchildren and,
and for them, and for kids, all of this country,
you're going to see the falls coming, kids going back to school,
you're going to see in schools all over America, drills are,
this is what you do. If somebody walks into the school, all right,
you're going to hide under, here you go over there kids.
A couple of months ago, I was in Iowa. This guy he's about six foot,
two big guy, probably a football player. And he says, Senator Sanders,
I got to tell you that the young people in my school are increasingly
frightened, terrified about what could happen in the school.
Think about what this, the trauma, the trauma of,
of what this gun violence is doing. So I think we're all as Americans,
the Louisiana [inaudible], but they're
all going to have to come together and figure this one out and do the best the
weekend. Now.
Would that mean forcibly removing these guns from
people's homes?
You're going to have the FBI knocking on somebody's doors and taking them.
That's not what we do in America.
We have 400 million guns already out there building more every year. Right now,
as we speak gun manufacturers are, make money.
Manufacturers are making more guns. This is happening right now.
So if those guns already exist, there's more than enough. Oh yeah.
How would you stop?
Well, again, I think, look, you know,
I do think there should be a ban on assault weapons.
So that means that manufacturers would not be able to produce or sell those.
To American citizens, but not to the military, obviously, obviously.
Okay. So, you know, and your point is well-taken,
if you've got 400 million guns out there, you know, so I,
I think there are approaches, no one has any magical solution,
but I've given you a, I'll tell you something else that I didn't mention.
And that is the role of gun manufacturers is that if
you are a gun manufacturer and you are selling a hell of a lot of guns
to a gun store in an area, which normally would not think, I mean,
these guys know, you know what, cities by what towns, by how many guns.
And if suddenly there is a tremendous demand, you gotta be thinking and be like,
why is, why is this con store buying so many guns?
Doesn't reflect the population in the area.
You gotta deal with that issue with the gun owners have to take some
responsibility.
Besides the guns, the gun.
Manufacturers.
Right? Besides the guns, the gun manufacturers,
the other gigantic issue is mental health.
The only way any of this ever happens is someone has to be insanely
mentally depraved. This the only way, and many of them are Medicaid,
and many of them are on pharmaceutical drugs.
And they have been since they were children,
including amphetamines like Adderall and Prozac and all this
different stuff that has varied effects on the human brain,
what could be done? What would you done to analyze this,
to find out what the cause and effect are, and to try to figure out what risk,
what role and how much these drugs are responsible?
Oh, well, well, two things,
let me response respond first by saying it goes without saying that we have a
mental health crisis in America before we even talk about drugs and for whatever
reason, um, you know,
there are a whole lot of people in the nature of our healthcare system.
Getting back to healthcare is I just talked to a woman literally last night.
Um, and we had a town meeting and she said,
this is unbelievable. She said, Bernie,
I was in Las Vegas when the terrible shooting took place. Okay.
And now I am, and I can understand this perfectly.
I'm seeing Dayton than I'm seeing watching television El Paso,
and I'm getting a PT PS PTSD reaction. All right. And that's totally under.
If you were in a place where people were shut down and anxious,
I'm trying to get counseling. I can't find it.
I remember a guy called up a woman called at my office in Burlington, Vermont.
And she said, I'm worried about my husband.
What he, my brother was his brother,
what he might do to himself or somebody else we're looking for mental health
counseling. We can't find something that we can afford.
So we need above and beyond gun violence we need.
And this is why I believe in Medicare for all mental health is healthcare.
You break your arm. That's a health issue. That's a medical issue.
Mental health is a medical issue.
And we have got to make mental health counseling available to all people in this
country when they need it. Not six months from now at a price,
they can afford it on the Medicare for all that would be free.
So that's number one. Number two, your point about, uh,
studying the impact of drugs on people's
behavior and possibly resulting in violence, absolutely deserves to be studied.
We should be studying the impact of drugs. In my view, this is a layman's view.
You know, I'm not a psychiatrist.
I worry very much that we are over medicating kids in
schools. You know, we have this, uh, deficit deficient issue.
You know, kids are running around in their act of, you know, when I was a kid,
people used to run around lay or act. If you know what, there wasn't,
they weren't drugged up. So I worry about that whole business,
but your point is well taken.
I think we need to study this issue and make sure that these drugs in fact are
not causing kinds of reactions that we will regret.